---
layout: project
title: Ethical Analysis of Boeing 737 MAX Crisis
---
INTRODUCTION

The Boeing 737 MAX crisis consisted of numerous plane crashes and malfunctions, killing passengers and pilots alike. The purpose of this essay is to analyze ethical failures using engineering ethics frameworks. Through combining work done in weeks 6 through 9 of MAE 4300, significant ethical challenges leading to the Boeing 737 MAX crisis will be explained and elaborated upon, followed by recommendations to avoid similar issues in the future. Through research and ethical analysis, it is clear that multiple individual, material, organizational, and systemic failures, rooted largely in profit-driven decision making and lack of transparency, led to preventable crashes.

The Boeing 737 MAX was designed to address fast-paced progress in the aviation industry, largely to compete with other manufacturers. According to Harvard Law, “the 737, situated lower to the ground than the Airbus A320, did not offer sufficient ground clearance to allow larger, more powerful engines to be mounted under the wings in the same placement in a redesigned 737 MAX.” To address this design change, Boeing “elected to move the engines forward, mounting them slightly in front of the wings rather than below” which “gave the 737 MAX a propensity to pitch upward under the thrust of more powerful engines” with potential to stall the plane during takeoff and descent. The Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System (MCAS) was utilized to compensate for this aerodynamic instability. Since MCAS had been used in the past, Boeing decided to classify the 737 MAX as a modified aircraft rather than a new one entirely. MCAS ended up forcing the nose of the plane down in situations where this was unnecessary, and even ended up being catastrophic. Furthermore, due to a lack of transparency, pilots were generally unaware of the existence of MCAS which heeded their ability to react and solve its inappropriate activation.

ETHICAL ISSUES LEADING TO THE CRISIS

There were three major groups of ethical issues leading to the Boeing 737 MAX crisis: lack of transparency, an inappropriate response to warning signs, and finally, organizational and cultural problems within Boeing, which ultimately explains many of the other ethical dilemmas.

Firstly, there was a major lack of transparency between several groups which led to the crisis. One of these groups were test pilots – at least two pilots deceived others and hid flight-technical information about MCAS. According to the Department of Justice, “in and around November 2016, two of Boeing’s 737 MAX Flight Technical Pilots, one who was then the 737 MAX Chief Technical Pilot and another who would later become the 737 MAX Chief Technical Pilot, discovered information about an important change to MCAS. Rather than sharing information about this change with the FAA AEG, Boeing, through these two 737 MAX Flight Technical Pilots, concealed this information and deceived the FAA AEG about MCAS” (Department of Justice, 2021). Based on this, it is reasonable to assume that there may have been other pilots that also hid information but were never caught. As we will see, pilots weren’t the only group concealing information about the Boeing 737 MAX. 

In addition to test pilots hiding information from the FAA, information was also hidden from commercial pilots from other airlines. According to the Department of Justice, there was no information about MCAS in manuals and pilots were unaware of the change: “a key document published by the FAA AEG lacked information about MCAS, and in turn, airplane manuals and pilot-training materials for U.S.-based airlines lacked information about MCAS” (Department of Justice, 2021). Noting that this “key document” was published by the FAA, we can come to various conclusions: one, that the FAA purposefully excluded information about MCAS, or two, that the FAA was unaware of the danger that implementing MCAS on a new aircraft posed because there was a lack of transparency between the FAA and Boeing. The latter is more likely, and it is reasonable to assume that because Boeing chose to frame the 737 MAX as a modification rather than a new aircraft, and MCAS had been used before (but in a different context), the FAA did not prioritize MCAS specifications in key documentation. Failure of the two test pilots to disclose key information about MCAS to the FAA around November 2016 likely aggravated this issue. 

Furthermore, similar to how manuals and training materials lacked information about MCAS, pilots did not receive training related to the implementation of MCAS nor for the new “modified” Boeing aircraft. Boeing faced a “constraint (contractually agreed to with Southwest Airlines) of minimizing the training requirements for carriers that ordered the MAX.41 By committing to producing an aircraft that would not trigger simulation-based training, engineers were restricted in design choices that would have improved safety.” Instead, Boeing implemented MCAS in a new context without proper documentation or transparency. Pilots did not receive any simulation-based training and did not know how to react when MCAS continually pushed the nose of the plane down. If sufficient training had occurred, it is reasonable to assume that pilots would have been better prepared to handle issues that arose, and even that issues with MCAS may have been noticed earlier on and addressed. 

In addition to lack of transparency, Boeing’s failure to respond appropriately to early warning signs also led to the crisis. They did not act conservatively after the first crash, likely due to organizational and cultural conditions which will be described later. The final report for flight JT610 (the first crash) reads: “The replacement AOA sensor that was installed on the accident aircraft had been mis-calibrated during an earlier repair. This mis-calibration was not detected during the repair” (FAA, 2020). Since the first crash was assumed to be a result of a miscalibration, Boeing deemed the first crash as a fluke and did not ground other 737 MAX flights. It is reasonable to assume that Boeing was also incentivized against grounding other flights in order to fulfill contracts to other airlines, and because grounding of planes would have resulted in a loss of profits and reputation for the company. On the other hand, most of Boeing and the FAA was unaware of the role that MCAS may have played due to continued lack of transparency: after the first crash, “the two 737 MAX Flight Technical Pilots continued misleading others—including at Boeing and the FAA—about their prior knowledge of the change to MCAS” (Department of Justice, 2021). However, the pilots were not the only ones to blame: following the same crash, “FAA AEG learned that MCAS activated during the flight and may have played a role in the crash. The FAA AEG also learned for the first time about the change to MCAS, including the information about MCAS that Boeing concealed from the FAA AEG” (Department of Justice, 2021). So even after the FAA learned that MCAS may have had a role in the crash, they did nothing to encourage Boeing to ground the remaining planes, and did not investigate the issue thoroughly enough to prevent more crashes.

Many of the decisions made by Boeing in relation to the crisis can be explained by organizational and cultural conditions faced within the company. Furthermore, many of these conditions can be explained by Boeing’s merger with McDonnell Douglas in 1997, which brought a culture of prioritizing profits above proper engineering. Harvard Law explains how the two companies had “different organizational heritages, with McDonnell Douglas emphasizing financial performance and Boeing prioritizing engineering quality” (Harvard Law, 2024). Although a company which appropriately balances engineering quality and finances sounds ideal, Harry Stonecipher, the president and chief executive officer of the newly merged companies, implies that Boeing may have leaned more towards the business side: “When people say I changed the culture of Boeing, that was the intent, so it’s run like a business rather than a great engineering firm” (Harvard Law, 2024). It is reasonable from this quote to assume that Boeing’s cultural shift towards financial success made it difficult to prioritize good engineering and public safety. Additionally, the merger caused location-related change – Boeing had explicit separation between upper management and engineers, which may have made engineers less likely to speak up about issues. According to Harvard Law, Boeing relocated its corporate headquarters “from Seattle, Washington— where its commercial aircraft division is located—to downtown Chicago. For the first time, the senior-most executives of the company were no longer in close proximity to engineers who oversaw aircraft design and production.” This change “had the effect of decreasing communication between the senior executive team and the leaders of the commercial aircraft division” (Harvard Law, 2024). Aside from solely geographical change, “engineers responsible for designing the MAX reported to their business unit heads and not to the chief project engineer responsible for signing off on and approving key decisions on the project. One result of this structure is that, under sworn testimony, the chief engineer claimed to be unaware of key features of MCAS, including its reliance on a single AOA sensor and that it could activate repeatedly” (Harvard Law, 2024). 

MCAS being able to activate repeatedly was a critical mistake – “In the original design, when a continuous erroneous high AOA sensor value existed, the MCAS control law used pilot release of the electric trim switch to reset MCAS activation. Once reset, the MCAS system would make another airplane nose-down stabilizer trim command after five seconds. This scenario would repeat each time the MCAS made a command and the pilot made an electric trim command of any duration and released the trim switch” (FAA, 2020). This, combined with pilots being unaware of the details of MCAS and lacking direct training, caused the nose of the plane to repeatedly be pushed down despite pilots’ attempts to operate in manual mode. The single AOA sensor exacerbated this issue, since there was no way to catch erroneous data: “In the original design, erroneous data from a single AOA sensor activated MCAS and subsequently caused airplane nose-down trim of the horizontal stabilizer” (FAA, 2020). If the chief engineer had known about these design choices and lack of redundancy, it is reasonable to assume that he would have investigated further and potentially advocated for a change, preventing both crashes.
 
Finally, organizational conditions within the Boeing board of directors contributed to the crisis. 
According to Harvard Law, “Boeing’s board (of directors) did not have a standing committee responsible for safety, and safety was not a regular discussion item on the agenda” … “Furthermore, the board did not have mechanisms to receive internal complaints about safety, nor did it require management to review employee communication on internal message boards to identify concerns about quality. Any internal complaints were instead directed to Boeing’s Safety Review Board, which consisted of chief engineers, but this board did not have direct reporting channels to the board” (Harvard Law, 2024). It is reasonable to assume that this organizational structure made it difficult for engineers and other Boeing staff to speak up about potential safety issues, and also did not do much to encourage deep thought and consideration of safety for the Boeing 737 MAX. Based on the lack of a standing committee responsible for safety, Boeing did not sufficiently prioritize safety and instead prioritized timelines and profit.

ETHICAL ANALYSIS USING ASME CANONS

The Fundamental Canons
Engineers shall hold paramount the safety, health, and welfare of the public in the performance of their professional duties.
Engineers shall perform services only in the areas of their competence; they shall build their professional reputation on the merit of their services and shall not compete unfairly with others.
Engineers shall continue their professional development throughout their careers and shall provide opportunities for the professional and ethical development of those engineers under their supervision.
Engineers shall act in professional matters for each employer or client as faithful agents or trustees and shall avoid conflicts of interest or the appearance of conflicts of interest.
Engineers shall respect the proprietary information and intellectual property rights of others, including charitable organizations and professional societies in the engineering field.
Engineers shall associate only with reputable persons or organizations.
Engineers shall issue public statements only in an objective and truthful manner and shall avoid any conduct which brings discredit upon the profession.
Engineers shall consider environmental impact and sustainable development in the performance of their professional duties.
Engineers shall not seek ethical sanction against another engineer unless there is good reason to do so under the relevant codes, policies and procedures governing that engineer’s ethical conduct.
Engineers who are members of the Society shall abide by the Constitution, By-Laws, and Policies of the Society, and they shall disclose knowledge of any matter involving another member’s alleged violation of the Policies of the Society in a prompt, complete and truthful manner to either the Executive Director/CEO or any member of the Executive Committee of the Board of Governors or ASME Human Resources who shall promptly notify the full Executive Committee. The Executive Committee shall initially determine whether the alleged conduct shall be addressed through this Policy or Policy 15.4 “Ethical Conduct Violation Procedures” or Policy 15.8 “Conflicts of Interest” or Policy 15.9 “Policy Against Discrimination (Including Discriminatory Harassment) – Members” or Policy 15.14 “Code of Conduct.” There may be situations where actions are taken pursuant to one or more Society Policies.

The first ethical question we will analyze is whether Boeing should have required additional pilot training. Although Canon 4 suggests that Boeing should have honored the contract with other airlines to minimize pilot training, pilots were not competent due to lack of training (Canon 2). Furthermore, those who were aware of MCAS details failed to report the ethical issue posed by lack of training (Canon 10), and Canon 1 implies that safety should be the number one priority. Although it is understandable that Boeing would be unable to back out of a contract made with another airline, the contract should not have been made in the first place, as it compromised public safety. And even with the contract in place, Boeing should have prioritized Canons 1, 2, and 10 over Canon 4 and prioritized safety first.

Related to providing proper pilot training, the next question we will ask is whether Boeing was ethically obligated to disclose MCAS to pilots. Canon 5 may have posed an issue here if MCAS details are seen as intellectual property rights, in which case Boeing may not have been able to disclose specific MCAS details. On the other hand, Boeing should have recognized that withholding information about MCAS would have placed the public in danger, violating Canon 1. Additionally, even those who were not in an appropriate position to be making these decisions would have been obligated to report the ethical violation of Canon 1 (based on Canon 10). Furthermore, it is unlikely that disclosing even the mere existence of MCAS with some high-level details would have violated intellectual property rights.

Next, we will ethically analyze Boeing’s response to the first (Lion Air) crash. Canon 7 addresses the way in which Boeing was ethically obligated to create public announcements – in a truthful manner. Boeing framed the first crash as a fluke rather than a systematic failure; although the angle of attack miscalibration did lead to the crash, Boeing failed to truthfully communicate the relationship between this mistake and MCAS. Although Boeing grounding planes would have seemingly violated Canon 4 since they would no longer be acting as faithful agents to other airlines by honoring contracts, Boeing was ethically obligated to put safety first and take the conservative approach. Furthermore, those who knew that MCAS was an issue and said nothing (for example, the two test pilots) violated Canon 10 and would have been ethically obligated to speak up when Boeing both publicly announced the crash as a fluke and decided against grounding other planned 737 MAX flights.

It is reasonable to assume that some engineers were aware of problems with MCAS or potential issues with design, including the lack of redundancy in using a single AOA sensor and the fact that MCAS could activate repeatedly, even in manual mode. Therefore, the next question we will explore is whether engineers were ethically obligated to more strongly advocate their concerns about MCAS and its implementation. Based on Canon 4, engineers would have had to act as faithful agents to those above them, so it may have been difficult to speak up when superiors were communicating that MCAS was safe. Additionally, the known organizational structure and culture at Boeing (as discussed previously) likely would have further exacerbated the difficulty of engineers advocating their concerns. Ultimately, though, engineers were ethically obligated to put Canons 1 and 10 first even if organizational structure made it difficult.

Based on the previous discussion of Boeing culture and priorities after the McDonell-Douglas merger, it is reasonable to assume that Boeing had a tendency to weigh profit and timelines over public safety. Boeing management, many who were unaware of the issues with MCAS, would have been ethically obligated against calling out design decisions based on Canon 9. Part of the issue was Boeing’s organizational structure and lack of transparency between different org levels, which meant that upper management, chief engineers, and other groups were unaware of crucial information. At the same time, Boeing management should have recognized this earlier and followed Canon 1 to improve communication between personnel to prevent issues with MCAS and the subsequent crashes. Additionally, some Boeing management was certainly aware of ethical issues and failed to act on them, going against Canon 10.

AVOIDING FUTURE ETHICAL FAILURES

There are several individual-level solutions that would be effective in preventing similar ethical failures in the future. One is to implement stronger ethical training for engineers and managers at all levels of org structure. Additionally, there needs to be a better reporting mechanism for ethical or safety-related concerns; including implementing a safety committee within the Boeing board of directors, and also utilizing some type of survey or anonymous reporting method that is widely publicized and available to individual employees. Finally, there should be a shift towards prioritizing transparency within Boeing’s professional culture, potentially shifting away from prioritizing timeline pressure and profits. This is something that can start at an individual level, coming from high-up personnel which can then trickle down to engineers and other employees.

Organizational-level solutions would also be effective at minimizing the risk of another crisis. Firstly, it is important to restructure reporting such that engineers answer to project leads who are knowledgeable about design rather than reporting to business leads who have a different background, knowledge base, and priorities. Similarly, a location shift so that engineers and management are working close together would encourage more cross-communication and transparency between personnel and groups. Finally, it is important to emphasize proper engineering over timeline and profits, as the merger with McDonnell-Douglas may have over-emphasized Boeing as a business rather than a great engineering firm. 
Finally, systemic-level solutions are important to prevent ethical failures in the future. First of all, the FAA may consider creating clearer and more strict rules on what qualifies as a “modification,” or additionally require more testing or justification as to why a modification was chosen rather than a new design. Additionally, they could create more strict rules on when simulator-based training is required, both to discourage choosing to modify a vehicle for the sole purpose of avoiding training, and to ensure that pilots are better prepared for potential issues. There also needs to be stronger oversight of delegated authority on a systemic level to prevent unethical decisions from going unnoticed, so that potential issues are caught earlier. Finally, there should be more requirements for redundancy which would have prevented the implementation of a single AOA sensor.
Based on the information and ethical analysis provided, it is clear that the Boeing 737 MAX crisis stemmed from intertwined technical, ethical, and organizational issues. The crisis demonstrates the importance of transparency, safety prioritization, and robust organizational structures within engineering companies in order to avoid unethical decisions and similar crises. The crisis also emphasizes several lessons to future engineers, including the importance of safety taking precedence over cost and convenience.

